.TH NODEX 1 "2026-07-13" "nodex 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nodex \- secure CLI for inspecting and operating self\-hosted infrastructure
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nodex
[\fIGLOBAL\-FLAGS\fR]
\fICOMMAND\fR
[\fICOMMAND\-ARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nodex
is a local command\-line interface for inspecting and operating self\-hosted infrastructure.
It is Proxmox\-first, supporting both read\-only inspection and safe mutation operations across 31 provider capabilities with a five\-tier safety model.
Nodex is a single binary with no daemon, agent, or telemetry.
.SH GLOBAL FLAGS
.TP
.BI \-\-profile " " \fINAME\fR
Override the current profile.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " " \fIFORMAT\fR
Output format: \fBtable\fR, \fBjson\fR, or \fByaml\fR.
Default: table (TTY), json (non\-TTY).
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " " \fIDURATION\fR
Request timeout (default: 30s).
.TP
.BI \-\-limit " " \fIN\fR
Limit output items (0 = no limit).
.TP
.B \-\-all
Aggregate across all configured profiles.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable color output.
.TP
.B \-\-non\-interactive
Disable interactive prompts.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Suppress non\-essential output.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Info\-level stderr output.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Debug\-level stderr output (redacted).
.SH MUTATION FLAGS
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Confirm reversible operations (Tier 1).
.TP
.B \-\-force
Confirm disruptive operations (Tier 2, requires \-\-yes).
.TP
.B \-\-wait
Wait for the provider task to complete before exiting.
.TP
.B \-\-expert
Enable expert\-mode operations (Tier 4: identity, ACL changes).
.TP
.B \-\-password\-stdin
Read password from stdin instead of interactive prompt.
.SH SAFETY TIERS
.TP
.B Tier 0 (Observation)
Read\-only. No confirmation required.
.TP
.B Tier 1 (Reversible)
Requires \-\-yes or interactive prompt.
.TP
.B Tier 2 (Disruptive)
Requires \-\-yes \-\-force or double confirmation.
.TP
.B Tier 3 (Destructive)
Requires typing the target identifier.
.TP
.B Tier 4 (Security Admin)
Requires \-\-expert flag.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS nodex init
Initialize nodex configuration interactively.
Non\-interactive with \-\-non\-interactive.
.SS nodex completion \fISHELL\fR
Generate shell completion (bash|zsh|fish). Writes to stdout.
.SS nodex version
Print version information.
.SS nodex provider list
List available providers.
.SS nodex provider capabilities \fINAME\fR
Show capabilities for a provider.
.SS nodex profile add \fINAME\fR [\-\-provider proxmox|pbs]
Add a new connection profile. The provider defaults to proxmox.
.SS nodex profile list
List all configured profiles.
.SS nodex profile show \fINAME\fR
Show details for a specific profile.
.SS nodex profile set\-credentials \fINAME\fR [\-\-backend file|keyring] [\-\-credential\-name \fINAME\fR]
Prompt for Proxmox API token credentials, store them, and update the profile credential reference.
.SS nodex profile use \fINAME\fR
Set the current active profile.
.SS nodex profile current
Show the current active profile.
.SS nodex profile test [\fINAME\fR]
Test connectivity for a profile.
.SS nodex profile remove \fINAME\fR [\-\-remove\-credential]
Remove a profile, optionally deleting its referenced credential.
.SS nodex profile export \fINAME\fR
Export a sanitized profile (no credentials). Writes JSON to stdout.
.SS nodex profile import
Import a profile from stdin.
.SS nodex node list
List all nodes.
.SS nodex node show \fINAME\fR
Show details for a specific node.
.SS nodex node status \fINAME\fR
Show detailed node status including CPU, memory, disk, and uptime.
.SS nodex node services \fINAME\fR
List services running on a node.
.SS nodex node network \fINAME\fR
Show network interface configuration for a node.
.SS nodex node dns \fINAME\fR
Show DNS configuration for a node.
.SS nodex node time \fINAME\fR
Show time configuration for a node.
.SS nodex node disks \fINAME\fR
List physical disks on a node.
.SS nodex node certificates \fINAME\fR
List TLS certificates on a node.
.SS nodex node subscription \fINAME\fR
Show subscription status for a node.
.SS nodex node updates \fINAME\fR
List available package updates for a node.
.SS nodex vm list
List all virtual machines.
.SS nodex vm show \fIID\fR
Show details for a virtual machine (e.g., pve\-a/100).
.SS nodex vm config \fIID\fR
Show VM configuration.
.SS nodex vm snapshots \fIID\fR
List snapshots for a VM.
.SS nodex vm snapshot\-config \fIID\fR \fINAME\fR
Show snapshot configuration for a VM.
.SS nodex vm start \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Start a VM. Safety: Tier 1 (Reversible).
.SS nodex vm stop \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Stop a VM (force). Safety: Tier 1 (Reversible).
.SS nodex vm shutdown \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Graceful VM shutdown. Safety: Tier 1.
.SS nodex vm reset \fIID\fR [\-\-yes \-\-force]
Hard reset a VM. Safety: Tier 2 (Disruptive).
.SS nodex vm reboot \fIID\fR [\-\-yes \-\-force]
Reboot a VM. Safety: Tier 2 (Disruptive).
.SS nodex vm suspend \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Suspend a VM to disk. Safety: Tier 1.
.SS nodex vm resume \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Resume a suspended VM. Safety: Tier 1.
.SS nodex vm pause \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Pause (freeze) a VM. Safety: Tier 1.
.SS nodex vm unpause \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Unpause a frozen VM. Safety: Tier 1.
.SS nodex vm update \fIID\fR \fIPARAMS...\fR
Update VM configuration. Safety: varies.
.SS nodex vm delete \fIID\fR [\-\-yes \-\-force]
Delete a VM (destructive, requires type\-in confirmation). Safety: Tier 3.
.SS nodex vm cloud\-init \fIID\fR
Regenerate cloud\-init configuration for a VM.
.SS nodex vm template \fIID\fR
Convert VM to template.
.SS nodex vm snapshot create \fIID\fR \fINAME\fR [\-\-description \fITEXT\fR]
Create a VM snapshot.
.SS nodex vm snapshot delete \fIID\fR \fINAME\fR
Delete a VM snapshot (destructive).
.SS nodex vm snapshot rollback \fIID\fR \fINAME\fR
Roll back to a VM snapshot.
.SS nodex vm migrate \fIID\fR \-\-target \fINODE\fR [\-\-yes \-\-force]
Migrate a VM to another node. Safety: Tier 2.
.SS nodex vm clone \fIID\fR \-\-newid \fIID\fR \-\-name \fINAME\fR
Clone a VM.
.SS nodex vm disk resize \fIID\fR \fIDISK\fR \-\-size \fISIZE\fR
Resize a VM disk.
.SS nodex vm disk move \fIID\fR \fIDISK\fR \-\-storage \fISTORAGE\fR
Move a VM disk to another storage.
.SS nodex container list
List all containers.
.SS nodex container show \fIID\fR
Show details for a container.
.SS nodex container config \fIID\fR
Show container configuration.
.SS nodex container snapshots \fIID\fR
List container snapshots.
.SS nodex container snapshot\-config \fIID\fR \fINAME\fR
Show snapshot configuration for a container.
.SS nodex container start \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Start a container. Safety: Tier 1.
.SS nodex container stop \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Stop a container (force). Safety: Tier 1 (Reversible).
.SS nodex container shutdown \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Graceful container shutdown. Safety: Tier 1.
.SS nodex container reboot \fIID\fR [\-\-yes \-\-force]
Reboot a container. Safety: Tier 2 (Disruptive).
.SS nodex container suspend \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Suspend a container. Safety: Tier 1.
.SS nodex container resume \fIID\fR [\-\-yes]
Resume a suspended container. Safety: Tier 1.
.SS nodex container update \fIID\fR \fIPARAMS...\fR
Update container configuration. Safety: varies.
.SS nodex container delete \fIID\fR [\-\-yes \-\-force]
Delete a container (destructive, requires type\-in confirmation). Safety: Tier 3.
.SS nodex container template \fIID\fR
Convert container to template.
.SS nodex container snapshot create \fIID\fR \fINAME\fR
Create a container snapshot.
.SS nodex container snapshot delete \fIID\fR \fINAME\fR
Delete a container snapshot (destructive).
.SS nodex container snapshot rollback \fIID\fR \fINAME\fR
Roll back to a container snapshot.
.SS nodex container migrate \fIID\fR \-\-target \fINODE\fR [\-\-yes \-\-force]
Migrate a container. Safety: Tier 2.
.SS nodex container clone \fIID\fR \-\-newid \fIID\fR
Clone a container.
.SS nodex storage list
List all storage pools.
.SS nodex storage show \fINAME\fR
Show storage details.
.SS nodex storage content \fINAME\fR \-\-node \fINODE\fR
List storage content.
.SS nodex storage upload \fINAME\fR \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fIPATH\fR
Upload a file to storage.
.SS nodex storage download \fINAME\fR \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fIVOLUME\fR
Download a volume from storage.
.SS nodex storage delete \fINAME\fR \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fIVOLUME\fR
Delete a storage volume (destructive). Safety: Tier 3.
.SS nodex task list \-\-node \fINODE\fR
List all tasks for a node.
.SS nodex task show \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fIUPID\fR
Show task details.
.SS nodex status
Show cluster status overview.
.SS nodex cluster status
Show cluster quorum and node health.
.SS nodex cluster log
Show cluster log entries.
.SS nodex event list
List cluster events.
.SS nodex log \-\-node \fINODE\fR
Show node syslog.
.SS nodex doctor
Check system health and connectivity.
.SS nodex backup list \-\-node \fINODE\fR
List backup tasks for a node.
.SS nodex backup content \-\-node \fINODE\fR \-\-storage \fISTORAGE\fR
List backup content on a storage.
.SS nodex backup create \fIVMID\fR \-\-node \fINODE\fR \-\-storage \fISTORAGE\fR
Create a manual backup.
.SS nodex backup restore \fIVMID\fR \-\-archive \fIARCHIVE\fR \-\-storage \fISTORAGE\fR
Restore a VM from backup.
.SS nodex backup job list
List backup job schedules.
.SS nodex backup job show \fIID\fR
Show backup job details.
.SS nodex backup job create \fIPARAMS...\fR
Create a backup job schedule.
.SS nodex backup job update \fIID\fR \fIPARAMS...\fR
Update a backup job schedule.
.SS nodex backup job delete \fIID\fR
Delete a backup job schedule.
.SS nodex firewall list
List cluster firewall rules.
.SS nodex firewall aliases
List firewall aliases.
.SS nodex firewall ipsets
List firewall IP sets.
.SS nodex firewall security\-groups
List firewall security groups.
.SS nodex firewall options
Show firewall options.
.SS nodex firewall node\-rules \fINODE\fR
List node\-level firewall rules.
.SS nodex firewall vm\-rules \fINODE\fR \fIVMID\fR
List VM\-level firewall rules.
.SS nodex firewall rule create \fIPARAMS...\fR
Create a firewall rule.
.SS nodex firewall rule update \fIPOS\fR \fIPARAMS...\fR
Update a firewall rule.
.SS nodex firewall rule delete \fIPOS\fR
Delete a firewall rule.
.SS nodex ha list
List HA resources.
.SS nodex ha groups
List HA groups.
.SS nodex ha status
Show HA status.
.SS nodex ha current
Show current HA resource state.
.SS nodex sdn zones
List SDN zones.
.SS nodex sdn vnets
List SDN VNets.
.SS nodex sdn zone create \fITYPE\fR \fIZONE\fR
Create an SDN zone.
.SS nodex sdn zone delete \fIZONE\fR
Delete an SDN zone.
.SS nodex sdn vnet create \fIVNET\fR \-\-zone \fIZONE\fR
Create an SDN VNet.
.SS nodex sdn vnet delete \fIVNET\fR
Delete an SDN VNet.
.SS nodex pools list
List resource pools.
.SS nodex pbs status
Show Proxmox Backup Server host status (requires a profile with provider pbs).
.SS nodex pbs version
Show PBS server version.
.SS nodex pbs subscription
Show PBS subscription status.
.SS nodex pbs certificates
List PBS certificates.
.SS nodex pbs datastore list
List PBS datastore configurations.
.SS nodex pbs datastore show \fIDATASTORE\fR
Show one PBS datastore's configuration and usage.
.SS nodex pbs snapshot list \-\-datastore \fISTORE\fR [\-\-namespace \fINS\fR] [\-\-backup\-type vm|ct|host] [\-\-backup\-id \fIID\fR]
List backup snapshots in a PBS datastore.
.SS nodex pbs task list [\-\-running] [\-\-errors]
List PBS tasks.
.SS nodex pbs task show \fIUPID\fR
Show PBS task status.
.SS nodex pbs task log \fIUPID\fR
Show PBS task log.
.SS nodex pbs verify list
List PBS verification jobs.
.SS nodex pbs prune list
List PBS prune jobs.
.SS nodex pbs sync list
List PBS sync jobs.
.SS nodex pbs garbage\-collection status [\-\-datastore \fISTORE\fR]
Show PBS garbage-collection status.
.SS nodex network show \-\-node \fINODE\fR
Show node network interfaces.
.SS nodex network apply \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fICONFIG\fR
Apply network configuration.
.SS nodex network revert \-\-node \fINODE\fR
Revert pending network changes.
.SS nodex access users
List users.
.SS nodex access groups
List groups.
.SS nodex access roles
List roles.
.SS nodex access acl
List ACL entries.
.SS nodex access domains
List authentication domains.
.SS nodex access tokens \fIUSER\fR
List API tokens for a user.
.SS nodex access user create \fIUSERID\fR [\-\-password\-stdin]
Create a user (Tier 4: requires \-\-expert).
.SS nodex access user delete \fIUSERID\fR
Delete a user (Tier 4: requires \-\-expert).
.SS nodex ceph status \-\-node \fINODE\fR
Show Ceph cluster status.
.SS nodex ceph osd list \-\-node \fINODE\fR
List Ceph OSDs.
.SS nodex ceph mon list \-\-node \fINODE\fR
List Ceph monitors.
.SS nodex ceph pool list \-\-node \fINODE\fR
List Ceph pools.
.SS nodex ceph osd create \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fIDEV\fR
Create a new Ceph OSD.
.SS nodex ceph osd out \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fIOSDID\fR
Mark OSD as out.
.SS nodex ceph osd in \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fIOSDID\fR
Mark OSD as in.
.SS nodex ceph osd destroy \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fIOSDID\fR
Destroy an OSD (destructive).
.SS nodex ceph pool create \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fINAME\fR \fIPARAMS...\fR
Create a Ceph pool.
.SS nodex ceph pool destroy \-\-node \fINODE\fR \fINAME\fR
Destroy a Ceph pool (destructive).
.SS nodex replication list
List replication jobs.
.SS nodex replication show \fIID\fR
Show replication job details.
.SS nodex replication create \fIPARAMS...\fR
Create a replication job.
.SS nodex replication update \fIID\fR \fIPARAMS...\fR
Update a replication job.
.SS nodex replication delete \fIID\fR
Delete a replication job.
.SS nodex replication schedule \fIID\fR \-\-node \fINODE\fR
Schedule replication now.
.SH CREDENTIALS
Credentials are resolved in the following order:
.TP 1.
\fBcredential_ref\fR in profile (e.g., \fBkeyring:myprofile\fR, \fBfile:default\fR)
.TP 2.
Environment variables (e.g., \fBNODEX_PROFILE_TOKEN\fR)
.TP 3.
Credential files in \fI~/.nodex/credentials/\fR
.PP
Supported credential backends:
.TP
.B keyring
OS keyring (macOS Keychain, Linux Secret Service, Windows Credential Manager).
.TP
.B file
JSON files in \fI~/.nodex/credentials/\fR.
.TP
.B env
Environment variables.
.TP
.B stdin
Interactive prompt (read\-only, does not store).
.SH PROFILES
Profiles are stored in \fI~/.config/nodex/config.yaml\fR.
Each profile specifies a provider, endpoint, and optional credential reference.
On Linux, \fIXDG_CONFIG_HOME\fR overrides \fI~/.config\fR. On macOS the configuration file is under \fI~/Library/Application Support/Nodex/\fR. On Windows it is under \fI%AppData%\\Nodex\\\fR.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
General error
.TP
.B 2
Usage error
.TP
.B 3
Configuration error
.TP
.B 4
Credential unavailable
.TP
.B 5
Authentication failed
.TP
.B 6
Authorization denied
.TP
.B 7
Network error
.TP
.B 8
TLS error
.TP
.B 9
Incompatibility
.TP
.B 10
Unsupported capability
.TP
.B 11
Partial failure (\-\-all)
.TP
.B 12
Provider error
.TP
.B 13
Not found
.TP
.B 14
Timeout
.TP
.B 15
Cancellation
.TP
.B 16
Task failure
.TP
.B 17
Validation error
.TP
.B 18
Ambiguous outcome
.TP
.B 19
Rate limit
.TP
.B 20
Output error
.TP
.B 21
Conflict
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted (SIGINT)
.TP
.B 143
Terminated (SIGTERM)
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/nodex/config.yaml
Main configuration file.
.TP
.I ~/.nodex/credentials/
Credential files directory.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.BI NODEX_ " " \fIPROFILE\fR "_TOKEN"
API token for the given profile.
.TP
.BI NODEX_ " " \fIPROFILE\fR "_TOKEN_ID"
Token ID for the given profile.
.TP
.BI NODEX_ " " \fIPROFILE\fR "_TOKEN_SECRET"
Token secret for the given profile.
.TP
.BI NODEX_ " " \fIPROFILE\fR "_USERNAME"
Username for the given profile.
.TP
.BI NODEX_ " " \fIPROFILE\fR "_PASSWORD"
Password for the given profile.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Initialize configuration:
.PP
.RS
nodex init \-\-non\-interactive
.RE
.PP
Add a Proxmox profile:
.PP
.RS
nodex profile add lab
.RE
.PP
Set credentials:
.PP
.RS
nodex profile set\-credentials lab
.RE
.PP
Test connectivity:
.PP
.RS
nodex profile test lab
.RE
.PP
List nodes:
.PP
.RS
nodex node list
.RE
.PP
Start a VM:
.PP
.RS
nodex \-\-yes vm start pve\-a/100
.RE
.PP
Wait for a VM shutdown:
.PP
.RS
nodex \-\-yes \-\-wait vm shutdown pve\-a/100
.RE
.PP
Output as JSON:
.PP
.RS
nodex \-\-output json node list
.RE
.PP
Run across all profiles:
.PP
.RS
nodex \-\-all \-\-output json vm list
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
Geoffrey McClinsey.
.SH LICENSE
GPL v3. See \fI/usr/share/doc/nodex/LICENSE\fR.
